updated methods (#8)
nrdg/2024-dipy-parallelization: index.qmd

The WU-Minn Human Connectome Project collected a dataset of 1200 healthy adults, including T1 and T2 weighted MRI and diffusion-weighted MRI. The scans have a high spatial resolution of 1.25 × 1.25 × 1.25mm<sup>3</sup>. Scans from this dataset represent a good baseline for the type of scans typically used for tractography (XXX fact check). We used subject 10307 for all tests to avoid any differences between subjects.

To implement parallelization using ray for diffusion modeling we first segment the data into even chunks. Then we map the modeling function to a remote ray function and call it on each chunk. This results in an incredibly simple implementation that is easy to map onto any Python function that supports serialization via ray.

```python
func = ray.remote(func)
results = ray.get([func.remote(ii, *func_args, **func_kwargs)
                    for ii in in_list])
```

> We ran both a constrained spherical deconvolution, free water diffusion tensor, and sparse facile model through DIPY on our subject. We fit the model 5 times for each set of unique parameters. We ran the test on chunk sizes ranging from 2<sup>1<sup> to 2<sup>15<sup> and with CPU counts, 8, 16, 32, 48, and 72. Below is the argument provided to the docker image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We ran both a constrained spherical deconvolution, free water diffusion tensor, and sparse fasicle model through DIPY on our subject. We fit the model 5 times for each set of unique parameters. We ran the test on chunk sizes ranging from 2<sup>1<sup> to 2<sup>15<sup> and with CPU counts, 8, 16, 32, 48, and 72. Below is the argument provided to the docker image.
```

```

> --models csdm fwdtim --min_chunks 1 --max_chunks 15 --num_runs 5

Reviewer: Should also have "sfm" here as an option

```

> For parallelization of tractography in pyAFQ the previous approach is not viable, as many of the libraries used for tractography are written in Cython and do not support serialization. To circumvent this issue ray support actors, which allow you to utilize stateful workers that run in a separate process. This allows you to run any code in parallel, so long as you do not need to pass any data between workers that cannot be serialzied. By leveraging the new TRX file format we were able to implement parallelization fairly easily. We do so by creating multiple tractograms that are computed in parallel, each containing a chunk of the total data. These tractograms are written straight to disk as Trx files, spare a small cache in memory. We then concatenated the resulting Trx files into a single file at the end, which proved to have minimal computational cost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For parallelization of tractography in pyAFQ the previous approach is not viable, as many of the libraries used for tractography are written in Cython and do not support serialization. To circumvent this issue ray support actors, which allow you to utilize stateful workers that run in a separate process. This allows you to run any code in parallel, so long as you do not need to pass any data between workers that cannot be serialzied. By leveraging the new TRX file format we were able to implement parallelization fairly easily. We do so by creating multiple tractograms that are computed in parallel, each containing a chunk of the total data. These tractograms are written straight to disk as Trx files, while only using a small amount of RAM at any given time. We then concatenated the resulting Trx files into a single file at the end, which proved to have minimal computational cost.
```

This method has some downsides, such as the fact that Ray cannot dynamically allocate these tasks to workers, and instead, resources must be declared in advance. It also generally has a higher memory overhead. Despite these downsides, it yields impressive results for parallelization without any updates to the libraries used.

(XXX) not sure if Code example makes sense here
```python
@ray.remote
class TractActor():
    def __init__(self):
        self.TrxFile = TrxFile
        self.aft = aft
        self.objects = {}

    def trx_from_lazy_tractogram(self, lazyt_id, seed, dtype_dict):
        id = self.objects[lazyt_id]
        return self.TrxFile.from_lazy_tractogram(
            id,
            seed,
            dtype_dict=dtype_dict)

    def create_lazyt(self, id, *args, **kwargs):
        self.objects[id] = self.aft.track(*args, **kwargs)
        return id

    def delete_lazyt(self, id):
        if id in self.objects:
            del self.objects[id]
```

> In testing, we isolate the computation of streamlines by computing the whole pipeline up to streamline generation, and then start the time and compute streamlines. We compute tractography with 1 seed per chunk, and the dmriprep preprocessing pipeline. Due to memory constraints using chunk sizes larger than ~80 streamlines causes the tracking to crash, so we iterated the test across chunk sizes of 1 to 72 (XXX sorta a lie will fix later) chunks. Similar to diffusion modeling we ran the test with CPU counts of, 8, 16, 32, and 72.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In testing, we isolate the computation of streamlines by computing the whole pipeline up to streamline generation, and then start the time and compute streamlines. We compute tractography with 1 seed per chunk. Due to memory constraints using number of chunks that is larger than ~120 causes the tracking to crash, so we iterated the test across n_chunks of 1 to n*n_cores, except in the n_cores = 72 case, where 72 chunks was the maximal number. Similar to diffusion modeling we ran the test with CPU counts of 8, 16, 32, and 72.
```

![](figures/cost_vs_cpus.png){width=80% height=80%}

We have also utilized ray to parallelize tractography in pyAFQ. Tractography is a similarly "embarrassingly parallel" task, where you have many streamlines that can be computed independently of each other. To parallelize tractography we utilized rays [actors](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-core/actors.html), which are stateful workers. These proved particularly useful as they allow us to avoid serialization of the large python objects used to compute tractography, by encapsulating the objects inside an actor such that they are not passed in or out of the actor and are instead accessed using helper methods.

![](figures/pyAFQ_speedup.png)

> ```python

Reviewer: Repeated from above. I'd delete it here and leave it in the methods.

@ray.remote
class TractActor():
    def __init__(self):
        self.TrxFile = TrxFile
        self.aft = aft
        self.objects = {}

    def trx_from_lazy_tractogram(self, lazyt_id, seed, dtype_dict):
        id = self.objects[lazyt_id]
        return self.TrxFile.from_lazy_tractogram(
            id,
            seed,
            dtype_dict=dtype_dict)

    def create_lazyt(self, id, *args, **kwargs):
        self.objects[id] = self.aft.track(*args, **kwargs)
        return id

    def delete_lazyt(self, id):
        if id in self.objects:
            del self.objects[id]
```

> The [TRX](https://github.com/tee-ar-ex/trx-python) file format also proved very useful. To avoid having multiple workers write to the same object we have each worker write to its own TRX file on disk, and then at the end, all files are concatenated into one. This proved to be a very robust solution that still has fairly low memory usage.

Reviewer: We can move some of this to methods (this is how the implementation was made easy) and some of it can be moved to discussion (what are the advantages of trx).
